What are the different protection levels in Android Permission?
  MindOrks Mentor Ali Mentor Amit MindOrks Admin MindOrks 24th July 2019 What are the different protection levels in Android Permission? Whenever we are developing an Android application, we need various components of Android devices like camera, GPS, etc. So, to use these features of our Android device, we need to take permission from the user to use something present on their phone. You can’t directly use any of those features. Also, there are various protection levels in permission i.e. if the protection level of permission is very low then you need not ask the user to use that permission. You can directly use that. But for dangerous permissions, you need to explicitly take permission from the user. In this blog, we will learn various protections levels in permission. So, let’s get started. Protection levels Normally, if we want to add take some permission from the user, we write the below code in our AndroidManifest.xml file: <uses-permission android:name="android.permission.INTERNET" /> The above line grants permission to use the internet. Using permission is not a simple task, you have to decide if you need to explicitly ask the user for permission or you can directly take permission. This decision is made based on the protection level of permission. Following are the three protection levels of permissions in Android: Normal Permissions Signature Permissions Dangerous Permissions These are the three main protection levels of permissions, apart from this there is one more protection level called the Special Permission. Let’s have a look at them, one by one. Normal Permissions If there is a very little or no risk of the user privacy then the permission comes under the Normal Permission category. For example, if you want to get the data and time, then these things involve no user privacy and in this case, you need not ask the user to use date or time. You can directly use this facility by adding permission in the AndroidManifest.xml file. At the installation time, the system will automatically grant permission to your app. Following are the permission that comes under Normal Permissions: ACCESS_LOCATION_EXTRA_COMMANDS ACCESS_NETWORK_STATE CHANGE_NETWORK_STATE ACCESS_WIFI_STATE CHANGE_WIFI_STATE CHANGE_WIFI_MULTICAST_STATE BLUETOOTH BLUETOOTH_ADMIN INTERNET SET_ALARM SET_WALLPAPER VIBRATE WAKE_LOCK Signature Permissions The android system grants these permissions at the installation time but there is one condition. The app that is asking for some permission must be signed with the same signature as that of the app that defines the required permission. Following are some of the Signature permissions: BIND_ACCESSIBILITY_SERVICE BIND_AUTOFILL_SERVICE BIND_CARRIER_SERVICE BIND_DEVICE_ADMIN BIND_INPUT_METHOD BIND_NFC_SERVICE BIND_TV_INPUT BIND_WALLPAPER READ_VOICEMAIL WRITE_SETTINGS WRITE_VOICEMAIL Dangerous Permissions Dangerous permissions include that permission that involve user data in some or the other way. For example, if you want to read contacts from the phone or you want to access the file storage of the phone then these permissions come under the Dangerous permission as they include user’s privacy. To use Dangerous permissions, you have to explicitly ask for permission before using that by showing some alert dialog or any other dialog. If the user denies the permission then your application can’t use that particular permission. Following are some of the Dangerous permissions: READ_CALENDAR WRITE_CALENDAR CAMERA READ_CALL_LOG WRITE_CALL_LOG READ_CONTACTS WRITE_CONTACTS GET_ACCOUNTS ACCESS_FINE_LOCATION ACCESS_COARSE_LOCATION SEND_SMS RECEIVE_SMS Special Permissions These are those permissions that are neither Normal permissions nor Dangerous permissions. Most of the applications should not use these permissions because they are very sensitive and you need user authorization before using these permissions. To use this permission, you must declare it in the AndroidManifest.xml file and then send an intent to request for user authorization. Some of the Special permissions are: WRITE_SETTINGS SYSTEM_ALERT_WINDOW Conclusion In this blog, we learned various protection levels that are present in permissions. They are Normal permissions, Signature permissions, and Dangerous permissions. If you want to look more examples of these permissions then you can refer to the Android website . Keep Learning :) Team MindOrks! Recommended for You Creating Different Build Variants in Android 7th December 2020 In this blog, we are going to learn how to create different build variants in any Android Project. By creating a build variant, you can create different versions of your app using the same project. Understanding and Implementing Permission in Android Q 11th May 2019 In this blog, we will understand the new privacy-based location permission in Android Q and how to implement it in your app. Exploring Android ViewPager2 in Android 29th May 2019 As Google introduced a new ViewPager called the ViewPager2 with some cool features like vertical orientation, use of Recycler View and many more. So, in this blog, we will explore the new ViewPager2 with its implementation as well . Android KTX - Android development with Kotlin 27th May 2019 In this blog, we will learn how to implement the Android KTX feature of the Android Jetpack that was announced in the Google I/O 2018. We will learn how Kotlin will help us to write the same code and use the same APIs used in Java in a much easier and faster way. Implementing Easy Permissions in Android: Android Tutorial 13th June 2019 In this blog, we will learn how to implement Easy Permissions in Android. Easy Permissions are used to ask for permissions required by the application explicitly. These are used to ask users for permissions that are dangerous in nature and involves user privacy. Animation in Android - Android Tutorial 24th June 2019 In this blog, we will learn how to use Animation in our Andoird Application. Animations are used to convey the message in a better way. It helps in improving the user experience. So, this blog is all about Animations in Android. So, let's learn about Animation. Connect With Your Mentors Janishar Ali Founder | IIT-BHU | 10 Yrs Exp. Amit Shekhar Founder | IIT-BHU | 10 Yrs Exp. Copyright 2022, MindOrks Nextgen Private Limited